---
title: 'Scientific Reading, Writing and Presenting'
date: 2023-08-21
permalink: /posts/2023/08/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - Notes
---

This is a note on how to do science reading, writing, and presentation.

# Scientific Reading, Writing and Presenting [^1]
[^1]: The original author is Prof. Dr.-Ing. Andreas Geiger, University of Tübingen / MPI-IS.

## Literature Search
### How do I find relevant literature?

> If you don't have a starting point (paper) yet, use **keyword** based search

- [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com)
- [SemanticScholar](https://www.semanticscholar.org)

> If you found an interesting paper, you can use forward and backward search

- For **finding new papers** that cite this paper, click the "Cited by" on Google Scholar
- For **finding older papers** cited by a paper, read related work section (references)

> Use online tools

- [Connected Papers](https://www.connectedpapers.com)
- [Research Rabbit](https://www.researchrabbit.ai)
- Find **author's homepage** and check their publications

### Is a paper worth reading?
- In general, it's difficult to say before reading
- You must **invest time**, it's a hard work

### How do I organize my literature?
> Citation and reference management software

- JabRef (offline)
- Mendeley (offline / online)
- Zotero (offline / online)

## Scientific Reading
### How to read a paper?
- Unless 100% sure the paper is **relevant**, don't read it linearly from start to end
- Instead, take a **quick look** at abstract, contributions, teaser, results (~ 10 min)
- Take notes, summarize and decide if you want to **read it in depth** (~ 2h)

> **Keep notes**

- **Highlight** important passages
- Add **comments**, take **notes**
- Mark what you did understand and what you didn't
- **Summarize** in your own words

> **Understand** the content deeply

- Look up unknown concepts
- Read prior work if necessary

## Scientific Writing and Reviewing
### How to write a report?
> Start early and iterate

- Writing needs **time**
- **Ideas** form while writing
- **Problems** surface while writing
- It's important to start writing **early** on and iterate
- Start with a longer text and **shorten it later**
- Be inspired by the papers you read, adopt good writing styles
- Make sure **language** and **grammar** are correct, avoid colloquial language (use tools like [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com) for finding and fixing typos)

> Come up with a **good structure**

- Abstract - Motivation and key messages? (200-400 words)
- Introduction - What is the problem? Where does it occur?
- Motivation - Why should we care? What applications?
- Background - Which background knowledge is necessary?
- Approach - How does it work? How do different methods compare?
- Results – What has been achieved? What works and what doesn't? Why?
- Summary – What should we have learned? Future work?
- References – Use the \cite command

> **Follow good scientific practice**

- Your text should be **your own exposition** and explain things in your words
- **Don't** copy sentences 1:1 from your sources (unusual in natural science)
- Whenever stating a fact that is known, add the corresponding **citations**
- Make sure all related work is cited appropriately (otherwise: plagiarism)
- Citations are added before punctuation marks
- Use Latex in combination with [**Bibtex**](https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/Bibtex_bibliography_styles) to manage your citations and bibliography
- Use the cite package to format the bibliography alphabetically

> **Figures help understanding**

- Place figure outside running text, usually at **top of page**
- Adjust **font size** to font size of main text
- **Caption** should describe figure concisely to be understood stand-alone
- When using a figure or table from another source, **cite** the source in the caption
- Make sure all figures and tables are **referenced** from the main text
- You can reference the same figure or table multiple times

### What is a review?
> **Reviews are a core element of the scientific process**

- Provide **feedback** to the authors prior to publication, including: Language, clarity, math, rigor, references, experiments (and novelty)
- They serve to improve the manuscript ⇒ make **concrete suggestions**
- Reviews are **objective** and state both **pros and cons**
- Reviews judge the **quality of a paper** and if it gets accepted
- Area chairs / associate editors make final decision based on reviews
- Often the authors and reviewers don’t know each other (double blind)
- Sometimes the reviewers can see the author’s names (single blind)

> Your review provides value

- What is the report about and why is the problem relevant?
- Is the structure of the report appropriate or could it be improved?
- Is the problem description clear? Is it easy to follow?
- Are related works cited appropriately? Are citations missing?
- Are the related works clustered in groups / a taxonomy? Can it be improved?
- Does the report discuss pros and cons of the presented methods?
- Is the problem described formally? Is the math correct? Can it be improved?
- Are all symbols / formulas explained? Common notation? Easy to follow?
- Are the methods well illustrated? If not, what is missing / what can be improved?
- Do the table / figure captions help understanding the tables / figures?
- Is the the language clear and correct? Are there typos?
- Is the experimental setup properly explained?
- Are all utilized datasets, baselines and metrics explained?
- Does the report present qualitative and quantitative results?
- Are the results discussed in an objective manner (pros and cons)?
- Provide both positive and negative feedback, be constructive

### Where should I start?
- **LaTex** is a standard tool for **academic typesetting**
- Latex allows for professional typesetting of text, formulas, illustration and tables
- **Overleaf** is an online Latex editor: no installation required, good for beginners

## Scientific Presenting
> What should I pay attention to?

- Remember that **you know more** about your subject than anyone else
  - Never assume knowledge of your audience
  - Pitch your talk such that experts and non-experts (your friend) can understand
- Come up with a **good structure**
  - Introduction – What is the problem? Why should we care? Applications?
  - Approach – How does it work? How do different methods compare
  - Results – What has been achieved? What works and what doesn’t? Why?
  - Summary – What should we have learned? Pros and Cons? Future Work?
- Finalize your talk **well in advance**

> How should I prepare my slides?

- **Your story matters**
  - A common mistake is to create too many slides
  - Make sure you spend at least **1 minute per slide** (less slides than minutes)
  - Keep slides **simple and clean** to not distract the audience from your message
  - Use a simple template, avoid excessive decoration / logos
  - Use a **large font size**
  - Use simple and consistent color scheme
  - Use a **homogeneous** background
  - Add your name, presentation title and page number to the **footline**

> Focus on the Core Message

- **Simplicity is key**
  - Remember that you can convey only **1 message per slide**
  - Use maximally **3 bullets per slide**, short sentences and simple figures
  - Avoid big tables, try to use **simple diagrams** or bar / pie / curve plots instead
  - **Highlight** important parts of a diagram / illustration as you go through it
  - Avoid long text, use **keywords** instead and explain while presenting
  - Your slides should support and illustrate your message, not replace it
  - But it is important to **explain** all baselines / metrics / symbols that you show
  - Avoid **animations** unless important to ease understanding (but then use them)

> Language

- **Your language matters**
  - Make sure **language** and **grammar** are correct
  - Use **simple** yet **precise** language
  - Avoid colloquial language
  - Avoid unnecessary complicated language
  - Use tools like [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com) for finding and fixing **typos**

> Formulas

- **Formulas are tough**
  - Formulas are challenging as they can become complex
  - However, they can help to make your message more precise
  - Distill the **core ideas** into the most relevant formulas
  - Remove unnecessary symbols (indices, etc.)
  - Make sure your notation is consistent across your presentation
  - Explain mathematical content **slowly** and **step-by-step**
  - Show formula side-by-side with a **simple example**
  - Often its easier to understand by example

> Which presentation tool should I use?

- Use any tool you get along with (PPT, Beamer, etc.)

> How should I practice my talk?

- **Practice is everything**
  - **Present** your talk **to yourself** several times before giving the talk
  - While practicing, keep track of your **time** and adjust presentation
  - If possible, present to others with no expert knowledge to get feedback
  - Avoid using presenter’s notes (and under no circumstances read them)
  - Plan your presentation without laser pointer or file cards
  - Instead, practice **free speech** and **highlight** items directly on the slide
  - Show bullets / illustrations one-by-one, highlight key numbers / plots, etc.

> What should I do if I get nervous?

- **Being nervous is normal**
  - Adrenaline helps to be present in the moment
  - **Setup** your laptop **prior to your session** and make sure video / audio works
  - Try to **remember you first 3 sentences** by heart, this helps getting started
  - Avoid using presenter’s notes (and under no circumstances read them)
  - Instead, practice **free speech**, every time you will become better

> What should I do during the talk?

- **Capture your audience**
  - **Keep eye contact** with your audience
  - **Speak slowly**, pause from time to time (i.e., after important points)
  - Explain the content of every slide, **do not leave things out**
  - Avoid using pointing devices (mouse / laser pointer / hands) too much
  - Be **excited** about the topic that you are presenting (fosters interest)
  - Keep track of the **time** (put a timer, e.g., mobile phone, in front of you)
